The initial ‘state’ of the universe was called the Planck epoch. It lasted a tiny fraction of a second, and at that point all matter of all kinds was condensed into a tiny point.
The period of “inflation” began at the end of the Planck epoch, and the synthesis of the original elements took place over a period of about 20 minutes. For the next 380,000 years, as the infant universe expanded and cooled, everything was a hot, dense plasma and light could not pass through it.
The period of recombination followed, and stable atoms of matter could be formed. This period also allowed radiation to propagate across the expanding universe.
The initial “glow” of the Big Bang can be seen throughout space today as the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB).
Because the universe has now expanded out beyond 13.7 billion light-years, there are areas we will never be able to detect. They are beyond our “visual horizon”.
The universe is composed of dark energy, dark matter, and ordinary matter (the atoms and molecules that make up everything we can detect).
The expansion rate of the universe has sped up in “modern” cosmic time.
It is not clear what the ultimate fate of the universe is. Currently some cosmologists consider that the universe will continue to expand, ultimately cooling off, or “freezing out”. That would result in the heat death of the cosmos.
The solar system consists of the Sun, planets, dwarf planets, moons, and numerous smaller objects such as comets and asteroids.
194 moons, 3,583 comets and 796,289 asteroids have been found in the solar system.
99.86% of the solar system’s mass is found in the Sun. The majority of the remaining 0.14% is contained within the eight planets.
The four smaller inner planets, also known as the “terrestrial planets”, are primarily composed of rock and metal.
The four outer planets, also known as the “gas giants”,  are substantially larger and more massive than the inner planets.
The two innermost gas giants, Jupiter and Saturn, are the largest of the four outer planets and are composed mainly of hydrogen and helium.
The two outermost gas giants, Uranus and Neptune, are composed largely of ices (water, ammonia and methane).  Together they are referred to as the “ice giants“.
Other structures of note in the solar system the Asteroid Belt, Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud.
The Milky Way Galaxy is our home galaxy in the universe. It is a fairly typical barred spiral with four major arms in its disk, at least one spur, and a newly discovered outer arm.
The Milky Way began as a series of dense regions in the early universe not long after the Big Bang. The first stars to form were in globular clusters that still exist. They are among the oldest stars formed in the Milky Way region.
The Milky Way has grown by merging with other galaxies through time. It is currently acquiring stars from a very small galaxy called the Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal, as well as gobbling up material from the Magellanic Clouds.
The Milky Way moves through space at a velocity of about 552 kilometres per second (343 miles per second) with respect to the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation.
The Milky Way’s central core contains a supermassive black hole. It is commonly referred to as Sagittarius A*. It contains the mass of about 4.3 million Suns.
The stars, gas and dust of the Milky Way all orbit the centre at a rate of about 220 kilometres per second. This constant rate for all stars at different distances from the core implies the existence of a shell of dark matter surrounding our galaxy.
Our galaxy will collide with Andromeda Galaxy in about 5 billion years. Some astronomers refer to our two galaxy as a binary system of giant spirals.
